Formal verification involves the use of logical and computational methods to establish claims that are expressed in precise mathematical terms. 

formal verification requires describing hardware and software systems in mathematical terms, at which point establishing claims as to their correctness becomes a form of theorem proving.

The Lean Theorem Prover aims to bridge the gap between interactive and automated theorem proving, by situating automated tools and methods in a framework that supports user interaction and the construction of fully specified axiomatic proofs. The goal is to support both mathematical reasoning and reasoning about complex systems, and to verify claims in both domains.

A proof is a convincing argument that a proposition is true. For mathematical propositions, these arguments make use of the definitions of the concepts that are involved as well as the rules of logical argumentation. Most proofs are written for people to understand, and leave out many tedious details. Computer-aided theorem provers like Lean are designed to allow mathematicians to write proofs while omitting many details, and it is the software's responsibility to fill in the missing explicit steps. These steps can be mechanically checked. This decreases the likelihood of oversights or mistakes.

Proofs are normally written using tactics, rather than by providing evidence directly. Tactics are small programs that construct evidence for a proposition. These programs run in a proof state that tracks the statement that is to be proved (called the goal) along with the assumptions that are available to prove it. Running a tactic on a goal results in a new proof state that contains new goals.

Dependent type theory is a powerful and expressive language, allowing you to express complex mathematical assertions, write complex hardware and software specifications, and reason about both of these in a natural and uniform way.
